==============
``2d`` Indexes
==============

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

Use a ``2d`` index for data stored as points on a two-dimensional
plane. The ``2d`` index is intended for :ref:`legacy coordinate pairs
<geospatial-legacy>` used in MongoDB 2.2 and earlier.

Use a ``2d`` index if:

- your database has legacy :ref:`legacy coordinate pairs
  <geospatial-legacy>` from MongoDB 2.2 or earlier, *and*

- you do not intend to store any location data as :term:`GeoJSON` objects.

See the :doc:`/reference/operator/query-geospatial` for the query
operators that support geospatial queries.

Considerations
--------------

.. |first-geo-index| replace:: ``2d`` index
.. |second-geo-index| replace:: :doc:`2dsphere index</core/2dsphere>`
.. include:: /includes/fact-limitation-one-geo-index-per-collection.rst

Do not use a ``2d`` index if your location data includes GeoJSON
objects. To index on both :ref:`legacy coordinate pairs
<geospatial-legacy>` *and* :ref:`GeoJSON objects <geospatial-geojson>`,
use a :doc:`2dsphere </core/2dsphere>` index.

You cannot use a ``2d`` index as a shard key when sharding a
collection. However, you can create and maintain a geospatial index on
a sharded collection by using a different field as the shard key.

Behavior
--------

The ``2d`` index supports calculations on a :ref:`flat, Euclidean plane
<geospatial-geometry>`. The ``2d`` index also supports *distance-only*
calculations on a sphere (i.e. :query:`$nearSphere`), but for
*geometric* calculations (e.g. :query:`$geoWithin`) on a sphere, store
data as :ref:`GeoJSON objects <geospatial-geojson>` and use the
``2dsphere`` index type.

A ``2d`` index can reference two fields. The first must be the location
field. A ``2d`` compound index constructs queries that select first on
the location field, and then filters those results by the additional
criteria. A compound ``2d`` index can cover queries.

``sparse`` Property
-------------------

``2d`` indexes are :doc:`sparse </core/index-sparse>` by default and
ignores the :doc:`sparse: true </core/index-sparse>` option. If a
document lacks a ``2d`` index field (or the field is ``null`` or an
empty array), MongoDB does not add an entry for the document to the
``2d`` index. For inserts, MongoDB inserts the document but does not
add to the ``2d`` index.

For a compound index that includes a ``2d`` index key along with keys
of other types, only the ``2d`` index field determines whether the
index references a document.

.. class:: hidden

   .. toctree::
      :titlesonly: 

      /tutorial/build-a-2d-index
      /tutorial/query-a-2d-index
      /core/geospatial-indexes
      /tutorial/calculate-distances-using-spherical-geometry-with-2d-geospatial-indexes

